[feat] added azure pipelines guide (#22777)
docker/docs: content/guides/azure-pipelines.md

linkTitle: Azure Pipelines and Docker
summary: |
  Learn how to automate Docker image build and push using Azure Pipelines.
params:
  tags: [devops]
  time: 10 minutes
---

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure the following requirements are met:

- A [Docker Hub account](https://hub.docker.com) with a generated access token.
- An active [Azure DevOps project](https://dev.azure.com/) with a connected [Git repository](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/repos/git/?view=azure-devops).
- A project that includes a valid [`Dockerfile`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/) at its root or appropriate build context.

## Overview

This guide walks you through building and pushing Docker images using [Azure Pipelines](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/devops/pipelines), enabling a streamlined and secure CI workflow for containerized applications. You’ll learn how to:

- Configure Docker authentication securely.
- Set up an automated pipeline to build and push images.

## Step 1: Configure Docker credentials

To authenticate securely with Docker Hub:

1. In your Azure DevOps project, navigate to **Project Settings > Pipelines > Library**.

> 2. Create a new **Variable Group** and add the following variables:

Reviewer: More secure method would be using service connection. Good to mentioned it as step need to follow before creating the CI 

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/library/service-endpoints?view=azure-devops#docker-hub-or-others

## Step 2: Create your pipeline

Add the following `azure-pipelines.yml` file to the root of your repository:

```yaml
# Trigger pipeline on commits to the main branch
trigger:
  - main

# Trigger pipeline on pull requests targeting the main branch
pr:
  - main

# Define variables for reuse across the pipeline
variables:
  imageName: '$(dockerRegistry)/$(dockerUsername)/my-image'  # Docker image name with registry and username
  dockerRegistry: 'docker.io'  # Docker registry URL (e.g., Docker Hub or private registry)
  dockerUsername: '$(DOCKER_USERNAME)'  # Docker username from variable group or pipeline variable
  buildTag: '$(Build.BuildId)'  # Tag the image with the unique build ID
  latestTag: 'latest'  # Additional tag for the latest image
  - group: my-variable-group  # Link to Azure DevOps variable group containing DOCKER_USERNAME and DOCKER_PASSWORD

# Define stages for the pipeline
stages:
  - stage: BuildAndPush
    displayName: Build and Push Docker Image
    # Only run this stage for the main branch and if previous steps succeeded
    condition: and(succeeded(), eq(variables['Build.SourceBranch'], 'refs/heads/main'))
    jobs:

>       - job: DockerJob

Reviewer 2: Since this is an entry-level guide, I don't think we need to overcomplicate it with a multi-stage example.

The `stages` key can be removed and the `jobs` can be moved the top level.

``` yaml
jobs:
- job: DockerBuild
  displayName: Build image and push to the DockerHub
  condition: and(succeeded(), eq(variables['Build.SourceBranch'], 'refs/heads/main'))
  pool:
    vmImage: ubuntu-latest
  steps:
    # Check out the repository code
    - checkout: self
      displayName: Checkout Code

    # Log in to Docker registry using a service connection for secure credential management
    - task: Docker@2
      displayName: Docker Login
      inputs:
        command: login
        containerRegistry: 'my-docker-registry'  # Service connection defined in Azure DevOps

    # Build the Docker image with BuildKit for caching and efficiency
    - task: Docker@2
      displayName: Build Docker Image
      inputs:
        command: build
        repository: $(imageName)  # Image name with registry and username
        tags: |
          $(buildTag)  # Tag with build ID
          $(latestTag)  # Tag as latest
        dockerfile: './Dockerfile'  # Path to Dockerfile
        arguments: '--cache-from $(imageName):latest'  # Use cached layers from latest image
      env:
        DOCKER_BUILDKIT: 1  # Enable BuildKit for faster builds and better caching

    # Validate the built Docker image by running a simple command (e.g., version check)
    - script: |
        docker run --rm $(imageName):$(buildTag) --version
      displayName: Validate Docker Image
      continueOnError: true  # Continue even if validation fails (optional)
    # Push the Docker image to the registry
    - task: Docker@2
      displayName: Push Docker Image
      inputs:
        command: push
        repository: $(imageName)
        tags: |
          $(buildTag)  # Push build ID tag
          $(latestTag)  # Push latest tag
```

Reviewer 3: I will not add this step:
```
# Validate the built Docker image by running a simple command (e.g., version check) - script: | docker run --rm $(imageName):$(buildTag) --version displayName: Validate Docker Image continueOnError: true # Continue even if validation fails (optional)
```

As not all image could start/run without configuration/env var/etc

---

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure the following requirements are met:

- A [Docker Hub account](https://hub.docker.com) with a generated access token.
- An active [Azure DevOps project](https://dev.azure.com/) with a connected [Git repository](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/repos/git/?view=azure-devops).
- A project that includes a valid [`Dockerfile`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/) at its root or appropriate build context.

## Overview

This guide walks you through building and pushing Docker images using [Azure Pipelines](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/devops/pipelines), enabling a streamlined and secure CI workflow for containerized applications. You’ll learn how to:

- Configure Docker authentication securely.
- Set up an automated pipeline to build and push images.

## Step 1: Configure a Docker Hub service connection

To securely authenticate with Docker Hub using Azure Pipelines:

1. Navigate to **Project Settings > Service Connections** in your Azure DevOps project.
2. Click **New service connection > Docker Registry**.
3. Choose **Docker Hub** and provide your Docker Hub credentials or access token.

> 4. Give the service connection a recognizable name, such as `my-docker-registry`, and grant access permissions to all pipelines.

Reviewer: Giving access to all pipelines is not a good practice. You should select the pipeline which need the service connection

Author: done

## Step 2: Create your pipeline

Add the following `azure-pipelines.yml` file to the root of your repository:

```yaml
# Trigger pipeline on commits to the main branch
trigger:
  - main

# Trigger pipeline on pull requests targeting the main branch
pr:
  - main

# Define variables for reuse across the pipeline
variables:
  imageName: 'docker.io/$(dockerUsername)/my-image'

>   dockerUsername: 'your-dockerhub-username'  # Replace with your Docker Hub username

Reviewer 3: We don't need it anymore I think
```suggestion
```

  buildTag: '$(Build.BuildId)'
  latestTag: 'latest'

stages:
  - stage: BuildAndPush
    displayName: Build and Push Docker Image
    condition: and(succeeded(), eq(variables['Build.SourceBranch'], 'refs/heads/main'))
    jobs:
      - job: DockerJob
        displayName: Build and Push
        pool:
          vmImage: ubuntu-latest
        steps:
          - checkout: self
            displayName: Checkout Code

          - task: Docker@2
            displayName: Docker Login
            inputs:
              command: login
              containerRegistry: 'my-docker-registry'  # Service connection name

          - task: Docker@2
            displayName: Build Docker Image
            inputs:
              command: build
              repository: $(imageName)
              tags: |
                $(buildTag)
                $(latestTag)
              dockerfile: './Dockerfile'

>               arguments: '--cache-from $(imageName):latest'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
              arguments: '--sbom=true --attest type=provenance --cache-from $(imageName):latest'
```

            condition: ne(variables['Agent.OS'], 'Windows_NT')
```

## What this pipeline does

This pipeline automates the Docker image build and deployment process for the main branch. It ensures a secure and efficient workflow with best practices like caching, tagging, and conditional cleanup. Here's what it does:

- Triggers on commits and pull requests targeting the `main` branch.
- Authenticates securely with Docker Hub using an Azure DevOps service connection.
- Builds and tags the Docker image using Docker BuildKit for caching.
- Pushes both buildId and latest tags to Docker Hub.
- Logs out from Docker if running on a self-hosted Linux agent.

## Detailed Step-by-Step Explanation 

### Step 1: Define Pipeline Triggers 

```yaml
trigger:
  - main

pr:
  - main
```

This pipeline is triggered automatically on:
- Commits pushed to the `main` branch
- Pull requests targeting `main` main branch

> [!NOTE]
> Learn more: [Define pipeline triggers in Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/build/triggers?view=azure-devops)

### Step 2: Define Common Variables

```yaml
variables:
  imageName: 'docker.io/$(dockerUsername)/my-image'

>   dockerUsername: 'your-dockerhub-username'  # Replace with your actual Docker Hub username

Reviewer 3: Same as before, I don't think we need it anymore
```suggestion
```

- Configure Docker authentication securely.
- Set up an automated pipeline to build and push images.

## Step 1: Configure a Docker Hub service connection

To securely authenticate with Docker Hub using Azure Pipelines:

1. Navigate to **Project Settings > Service Connections** in your Azure DevOps project.
2. Click **New service connection > Docker Registry**.
3. Choose **Docker Hub** and provide your Docker Hub credentials or access token.
4. Give the service connection a recognizable name, such as `my-docker-registry`.
5. Grant access only to the specific pipeline(s) that require it for improved security and least privilege.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Avoid selecting the option to grant access to all pipelines unless absolutely necessary. Always apply the principle of least privilege.

## Step 2: Create your pipeline

Add the following `azure-pipelines.yml` file to the root of your repository:

```yaml
# Trigger pipeline on commits to the main branch
trigger:
  - main

# Trigger pipeline on pull requests targeting the main branch
pr:
  - main

# Define variables for reuse across the pipeline
variables:

>   imageName: 'docker.io/$(dockerUsername)/my-image'

Reviewer 4: Yeah, that's what I meant.  that was just a poorly constructed blurb. LOL

  buildTag: '$(Build.BuildId)'
  latestTag: 'latest'

stages:
  - stage: BuildAndPush
    displayName: Build and Push Docker Image
    jobs:
      - job: DockerJob
        displayName: Build and Push
        pool:
          vmImage: ubuntu-latest
          demands:
            - docker
        steps:
          - checkout: self
            displayName: Checkout Code

          - task: Docker@2
            displayName: Docker Login
            inputs:
              command: login
              containerRegistry: 'my-docker-registry'  # Service connection name

          - task: Docker@2
            displayName: Build Docker Image
            inputs:
              command: build
              repository: $(imageName)
              tags: |
                $(buildTag)
                $(latestTag)
              dockerfile: './Dockerfile'
              arguments: |
                --sbom=true
                --attest type=provenance
                --cache-from $(imageName):latest
            env:
              DOCKER_BUILDKIT: 1

          - task: Docker@2
            displayName: Push Docker Image

>             condition: eq(variables['Build.SourceBranch'], 'refs/heads/main')

Reviewer 4: No.  An AzDO pipeline will only trigger on the initial repo.  If you wanted it to run on the fork, you'd have to configure a separate pipeline... or edit the AzDO pipeline configuration to point to a different repo.  That being said, secrets are scoped to an individual pipeline by default (without getting into more advanced topics like Variable Groups that are out-of-scope for this guide).

>             condition: eq(variables['Build.SourceBranch'], 'refs/heads/main')

Reviewer 5: Thanks for clarifying! Yes; mostly making sure the examples we show don't have "footguns" - it's easy to get such things from (and hard to find you made a mistake) so trying to make sure our examples are "copy/paste safe" or call out such things where needed ☺️

>             condition: eq(variables['Build.SourceBranch'], 'refs/heads/main')

Reviewer 4: Actually, I was kinda wrong on this.  Whoops.  From https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/security/overview?view=azure-devops#restrict-project-repository-and-service-connection-access:

> By default, pipelines are configured to build forks, but secrets and protected resources aren't automatically exposed to the jobs in those pipelines. It's essential not to disable this protection to maintain security.

But while the pipeline would "build" the forked repo, the fork wouldn't have access to the secrets / service connection unless that protection was disabled.

            inputs:
              command: push
              repository: $(imageName)
              tags: |
                $(buildTag)
                $(latestTag)

          # Optional: logout for self-hosted agents
          - script: docker logout
            displayName: Docker Logout (Self-hosted only)

>             condition: ne(variables['Agent.OS'], 'Windows_NT')

Reviewer 4: Nope.  Would have the same effect.

---
title: Introduction to Azure Pipelines with Docker
linkTitle: Azure Pipelines and Docker
summary: |
  Learn how to automate Docker image build and push using Azure Pipelines.
params:
  tags: [devops]
  time: 10 minutes
---

> This guide is a community contribution. Docker would like to thank [Kristiyan Velkov](https://www.linkedin.com/in/kristiyan-velkov-763130b3/) for his valuable contribution.

## Prerequisites

> Before you begin, ensure the following requirements are met:
> 
> - A [Docker Hub account](https://hub.docker.com) with a generated access token.
> - An active [Azure DevOps project](https://dev.azure.com/) with a connected [Git repository](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/repos/git/?view=azure-devops).
> - A project that includes a valid [`Dockerfile`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/) at its root or appropriate build context.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Before you begin, ensure you have the following requirements:

- A [Docker Hub account](https://hub.docker.com) with a generated access token.
- An active [Azure DevOps project](https://dev.azure.com/) with a connected [Git repository](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/repos/git/?view=azure-devops).
- A project that includes a valid [`Dockerfile`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/) at its root or appropriate build context.
```

## Overview

This guide walks you through building and pushing Docker images using [Azure Pipelines](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/devops/pipelines), enabling a streamlined and secure CI workflow for containerized applications. You’ll learn how to:

- Configure Docker authentication securely.
- Set up an automated pipeline to build and push images.

## Step 1: Configure a Docker Hub service connection

To securely authenticate with Docker Hub using Azure Pipelines:

1. Navigate to **Project Settings > Service Connections** in your Azure DevOps project.

> 2. Click **New service connection > Docker Registry**.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
2. Select **New service connection > Docker Registry**.
```

3. Choose **Docker Hub** and provide your Docker Hub credentials or access token.
4. Give the service connection a recognizable name, such as `my-docker-registry`.
5. Grant access only to the specific pipeline(s) that require it for improved security and least privilege.

> > [!IMPORTANT]
> > Avoid selecting the option to grant access to all pipelines unless absolutely necessary. Always apply the principle of least privilege.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> Avoid selecting the option to grant access to all pipelines unless absolutely necessary. Always apply the principle of least privilege.
```

## Step 2: Create your pipeline

Add the following `azure-pipelines.yml` file to the root of your repository:

```yaml
# Trigger pipeline on commits to the main branch
trigger:
  - main

# Trigger pipeline on pull requests targeting the main branch

> pr:
>   - main
> 
> # Define variables for reuse across the pipeline
> variables:
>   imageName: 'docker.io/$(dockerUsername)/my-image'
>   buildTag: '$(Build.BuildId)'
>   latestTag: 'latest'
> 
> stages:
>   - stage: BuildAndPush
>     displayName: Build and Push Docker Image
>     jobs:
>       - job: DockerJob
>         displayName: Build and Push
>         pool:
>           vmImage: ubuntu-latest
>           demands:
>             - docker
>         steps:
>           - checkout: self
>             displayName: Checkout Code
> 
>           - task: Docker@2
>             displayName: Docker Login
>             inputs:
>               command: login
>               containerRegistry: 'my-docker-registry'  # Service connection name
> 
>           - task: Docker@2
>             displayName: Build Docker Image
>             inputs:
>               command: build
>               repository: $(imageName)
>               tags: |
>                 $(buildTag)
>                 $(latestTag)
>               dockerfile: './Dockerfile'
>               arguments: |
>                 --sbom=true
>                 --attest type=provenance
>                 --cache-from $(imageName):latest
>             env:
>               DOCKER_BUILDKIT: 1
> 
>           - task: Docker@2
>             displayName: Push Docker Image
>             condition: eq(variables['Build.SourceBranch'], 'refs/heads/main')
>             inputs:
>               command: push
>               repository: $(imageName)
>               tags: |
>                 $(buildTag)
>                 $(latestTag)
> 
>           # Optional: logout for self-hosted agents
>           - script: docker logout
>             displayName: Docker Logout (Self-hosted only)
>             condition: ne(variables['Agent.OS'], 'Windows_NT')
> ```

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

## Set up Azure DevOps to work with Docker Hub

### Step 1: Configure a Docker Hub service connection

To securely authenticate with Docker Hub using Azure Pipelines:

1. Navigate to **Project Settings > Service Connections** in your Azure DevOps project.
2. Click **New service connection > Docker Registry**.
3. Choose **Docker Hub** and provide your Docker Hub credentials or access token.
4. Give the service connection a recognizable name, such as `my-docker-registry`.
5. Grant access only to the specific pipeline(s) that require it for improved security and least privilege.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Avoid selecting the option to grant access to all pipelines unless absolutely necessary. Always apply the principle of least privilege.

### Step 2: Create your pipeline

Add the following `azure-pipelines.yml` file to the root of your repository:

```yaml
# Trigger pipeline on commits to the main branch
trigger:
  - main

# Trigger pipeline on pull requests targeting the main branch
pr:
  - main

# Define variables for reuse across the pipeline
variables:
  imageName: 'docker.io/$(dockerUsername)/my-image'
  buildTag: '$(Build.BuildId)'
  latestTag: 'latest'

stages:
  - stage: BuildAndPush
    displayName: Build and Push Docker Image
    jobs:
      - job: DockerJob
        displayName: Build and Push
        pool:
          vmImage: ubuntu-latest
          demands:
            - docker
        steps:
          - checkout: self
            displayName: Checkout Code

          - task: Docker@2
            displayName: Docker Login
            inputs:
              command: login
              containerRegistry: 'my-docker-registry'  # Service connection name

          - task: Docker@2
            displayName: Build Docker Image
            inputs:
              command: build
              repository: $(imageName)
              tags: |
                $(buildTag)
                $(latestTag)
              dockerfile: './Dockerfile'
              arguments: |
                --sbom=true
                --attest type=provenance
                --cache-from $(imageName):latest
            env:
              DOCKER_BUILDKIT: 1

          - task: Docker@2
            displayName: Push Docker Image
            condition: eq(variables['Build.SourceBranch'], 'refs/heads/main')
            inputs:
              command: push
              repository: $(imageName)
              tags: |
                $(buildTag)
                $(latestTag)

          # Optional: logout for self-hosted agents
          - script: docker logout
            displayName: Docker Logout (Self-hosted only)
            condition: ne(variables['Agent.OS'], 'Windows_NT')
```
```

this just creates a heading that explains the difference between these steps versus the detailed explanation steps below (will leave a comment/suggestion there too)

## What this pipeline does

This pipeline automates the Docker image build and deployment process for the main branch. It ensures a secure and efficient workflow with best practices like caching, tagging, and conditional cleanup. Here's what it does:

- Triggers on commits and pull requests targeting the `main` branch.
- Authenticates securely with Docker Hub using an Azure DevOps service connection.
- Builds and tags the Docker image using Docker BuildKit for caching.
- Pushes both buildId and latest tags to Docker Hub.
- Logs out from Docker if running on a self-hosted Linux agent.

> ## Detailed Step-by-Step Explanation 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
## How the pipeline works
```

Updated heading for clarity

### Step 1: Define Pipeline Triggers 

```yaml
trigger:
  - main

pr:
  - main
```

This pipeline is triggered automatically on:
- Commits pushed to the `main` branch
- Pull requests targeting `main` main branch

> [!TIP]
> Learn more: [Define pipeline triggers in Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/build/triggers?view=azure-devops)

> ### Step 2: Define Common Variables

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Define common variables
```

```yaml
variables:
  imageName: 'docker.io/$(dockerUsername)/my-image'
  buildTag: '$(Build.BuildId)'
  latestTag: 'latest'
```

These variables ensure consistent naming, versioning, and reuse throughout the pipeline steps:

- `imageName`: your image path on Docker Hub
- `buildTag`: a unique tag for each pipeline run
- `latestTag`: a stable alias for your most recent image

> > [!IMPORTANT]
> > The variable `dockerUsername` is not set automatically.  
> > Set it securely in your Azure DevOps pipeline variables:  
> > 1. Go to **Pipelines > Edit > Variables**  
> > 2. Add `dockerUsername` with your Docker Hub username  
> >
> > Learn more: [Define and use variables in Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/process/variables?view=azure-devops&tabs=yaml%2Cbatch)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> [!IMPORTANT]
> 
> The variable `dockerUsername` is not set automatically.  
> Set it securely in your Azure DevOps pipeline variables:  
> 1. Go to **Pipelines > Edit > Variables**  
> 2. Add `dockerUsername` with your Docker Hub username  
>
> Learn more: [Define and use variables in Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/process/variables?view=azure-devops&tabs=yaml%2Cbatch)
```

Reviewer 6: indenting should resolve the numbers not rendering on the built page

 
### Step 3: Define Pipeline Stages and Jobs

```yaml
stages:
  - stage: BuildAndPush
    displayName: Build and Push Docker Image
```

> This stage executes only if:
> 
> - The source branch is main.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This stage executes only if the source branch is `main`.
```

> [!TIP]
> Learn more: [Stage conditions in Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/process/stages?view=azure-devops&tabs=yaml)

### Step 4: Job Configuration

```yaml
jobs:
  - job: DockerJob
  displayName: Build and Push
  pool:
    vmImage: ubuntu-latest
    demands:
      - docker
```

This job utilizes the latest Ubuntu VM image with Docker support, provided by Microsoft-hosted agents. It can be replaced with a custom pool for self-hosted agents if necessary.

> > [!TIP]
> > Learn more: [Specify a pool in your pipeline](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/pools-queues?view=azure-devops&tabs=yaml%2Cbrowser)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> [!TIP]
> 
> To learn more, see [Specify a pool in your pipeline](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/pools-queues?view=azure-devops&tabs=yaml%2Cbrowser).
```

#### Step 4.1 Checkout Code

```yaml
steps:
  - checkout: self
    displayName: Checkout Code
```

This step pulls your repository code into the build agent, so the pipeline can access the Dockerfile and application files.

> [!TIP]
> Learn more: [checkout step documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/yaml-schema/steps-checkout?view=azure-pipelines)

#### Step 4.2 Authenticate to Docker Hub

```yaml
- task: Docker@2
  displayName: Docker Login
  inputs:
    command: login
    containerRegistry: 'my-docker-registry'  # Replace with your service connection name
```

Uses a preconfigured Azure DevOps Docker registry service connection to authenticate securely without exposing credentials directly.

> > [!TIP]
> > Learn more: [Use service connections for Docker Hub](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/library/service-endpoints?view=azure-devops#docker-hub-or-others)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> [!TIP]
>
> To learn more, see [Use service connections for Docker Hub](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/library/service-endpoints?view=azure-devops#docker-hub-or-others).
```

> #### Step 4.3 Build the Docker Image

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Step 4.3: Build the Docker image
```

> - [Docker SBOM Attestations](/manuals/build/metadata/attestations/slsa-provenance.md)

#### Step 4.4 Push the Docker Image

```yaml
- task: Docker@2
  displayName: Push Docker Image
  condition: eq(variables['Build.SourceBranch'], 'refs/heads/main')
  inputs:
      command: push
      repository: $(imageName)
      tags: |
        $(buildTag)
        $(latestTag)
```

By applying this condition, the pipeline builds the Docker image on every run to ensure early detection of issues, but only pushes the image to the registry when changes are merged into the main branch—keeping your Docker Hub clean and focused

This uploads both tags to Docker Hub:
- `$(buildTag)` ensures traceability per run.
- `latest` is used for most recent image references.

#### Step 4.5  Logout from Docker (Self-Hosted Agents)

```yaml
- script: docker logout
  displayName: Docker Logout (Self-hosted only)
  condition: ne(variables['Agent.OS'], 'Windows_NT')
```

Executes docker logout at the end of the pipeline on Linux-based self-hosted agents to proactively clean up credentials and enhance security posture.

## Summary

> With this Azure Pipelines CI setup, you get:
> - Secure Docker authentication using a built-in service connection.
> - Automated image building and tagging triggered by code changes.
> - Efficient builds leveraging Docker BuildKit cache.
> - Safe cleanup with logout on persistent agents.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
With this Azure Pipelines CI setup, you get:

- Secure Docker authentication using a built-in service connection.
- Automated image building and tagging triggered by code changes.
- Efficient builds leveraging Docker BuildKit cache.
- Safe cleanup with logout on persistent agents.
```

- Build images that meet modern software supply chain requirements with SBOM and attestation

## Further Reading

> - [Azure Pipelines Documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/?view=azure-devops) - Comprehensive guide to configuring and managing CI/CD pipelines in Azure DevOps.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [Azure Pipelines Documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/?view=azure-devops): Comprehensive guide to configuring and managing CI/CD pipelines in Azure DevOps.
```

> - [Docker Task for Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/tasks/build/docker) - Detailed reference for using the Docker task in Azure Pipelines to build and push images.
> - [Docker Buildx Bake](/manuals/build/bake/_index.md) - Explore Docker's advanced build tool for complex, multi-stage, and multi-platform build setups. See also the [Mastering Buildx Bake Guide](/guides/bake/index.md) for practical examples and best practices.
> - [Docker Build Cloud](/guides/docker-build-cloud/_index.md) - Learn about Docker's managed build service for faster, scalable, and multi-platform image builds in the cloud.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [Docker Task for Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/tasks/build/docker): Detailed reference for using the Docker task in Azure Pipelines to build and push images.
- [Docker Buildx Bake](/manuals/build/bake/_index.md): Explore Docker's advanced build tool for complex, multi-stage, and multi-platform build setups. See also the [Mastering Buildx Bake Guide](/guides/bake/index.md) for practical examples and best practices.
- [Docker Build Cloud](/guides/docker-build-cloud/_index.md): Learn about Docker's managed build service for faster, scalable, and multi-platform image builds in the cloud.
```

- Commits pushed to the `main` branch
- Pull requests targeting `main` main branch

> [!TIP]
> Learn more: [Define pipeline triggers in Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/build/triggers?view=azure-devops)

### Step 2: Define Common Variables

```yaml
variables:
  imageName: 'docker.io/$(dockerUsername)/my-image'
  buildTag: '$(Build.BuildId)'
  latestTag: 'latest'
```

These variables ensure consistent naming, versioning, and reuse throughout the pipeline steps:

- `imageName`: your image path on Docker Hub
- `buildTag`: a unique tag for each pipeline run
- `latestTag`: a stable alias for your most recent image

> [!TIP]
> Learn more: [Define and use variables in Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/process/variables?view=azure-devops&tabs=yaml%2Cbatch)

### Step 3: Define Pipeline Stages and Jobs

```yaml
stages:
  - stage: BuildAndPush
    displayName: Build and Push Docker Image
```

This stage executes only if:

- The source branch is main.

> [!TIP]
> Learn more: [Stage conditions in Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/process/stages?view=azure-devops&tabs=yaml)

> 
> ### Step 4: Job Configuration

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion

### Step 4: Job Configuration
```

```yaml
jobs:
  - job: DockerJob
  displayName: Build and Push
  pool:
    vmImage: ubuntu-latest
    demands:
      - docker
```

This job utilizes the latest Ubuntu VM image with Docker support, provided by Microsoft-hosted agents. It can be replaced with a custom pool for self-hosted agents if necessary.

> [!TIP]
> Learn more: [Specify a pool in your pipeline](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/pools-queues?view=azure-devops&tabs=yaml%2Cbrowser)

#### Step 4.1 Checkout Code

```yaml
steps:
  - checkout: self

>     displayName: Checkout Code
> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    displayName: Checkout Code
```

    inputs:
      command: build
      repository: $(imageName)
      tags: |
          $(buildTag)
          $(latestTag)
      dockerfile: './Dockerfile'
      arguments: |
          --sbom=true
          --attest type=provenance
          --cache-from $(imageName):latest
    env:
      DOCKER_BUILDKIT: 1
```

This builds the image with:

- Two tags: one with the unique Build ID and one as latest
- Docker BuildKit enabled for faster builds and efficient layer caching
- Cache pull from the most recent pushed latest image
- Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) for supply chain transparency
- Provenance attestation to verify how and where the image was built

> [!TIP]
> Learn more: 
> - [Docker task for Azure Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/tasks/reference/docker-v2?view=azure-pipelines&tabs=yaml)
> - [Docker SBOM Attestations](/manuals/build/metadata/attestations/slsa-provenance.md)

#### Step 4.4 Push the Docker Image

```yaml
- task: Docker@2
  displayName: Push Docker Image
  condition: eq(variables['Build.SourceBranch'], 'refs/heads/main')
  inputs:
      command: push
      repository: $(imageName)
      tags: |
        $(buildTag)

>         $(latestTag)
> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
        $(latestTag)
```
